Making Students' Evaluations of 
Teaching Effectiveness Effective 
The Critical Issues of Validity, Bias, and Utility 
Herbert W. Marsh and Lawrence A. Roche 
University of Western Sydney, Macarthur 
This article reviews research indicating that, under ap- 
propriate conditions, students' evaluations of teaching 
(SETs) are (a) multidimensional; (b) reliable and stable; 
(c) primarily a function of the instructor who teaches a 
course rather than the course that is taught; (d) relatively 
valid against a variety of indicators of effective teaching; 
(e) relatively unaffected by a variety of variables hypoth- 
esized as potential biases (e.g., grading leniency, class 
size, workload, prior subject interest); and (f) useful in 
improving teaching effectiveness when SETS are coupled 
with appropriate consultation. The authors recommend 
rejecting a narrow criterion-related approach to validity 
and adopting a broad construct-validation approach, 
recognizing that effective teaching and SETs that reflect 
teaching effectiveness are multidimensional; no single 
criterion of effective teaching is sufficient; and tentative 
interpretations of relations with validity criteria and po- 
tential biases should be evaluated critically in different 
contexts, in relation to multiple criteria of effective teach- 
ing, theory, and existing knowledge. 
H eated debate concerning the merits and the short- 
comings of students' evaluations of teaching 
(SETs) continues to flourish, despite intensive 
ongoing research and international growth in their use as 
one indicator of teaching quality (Centra, 1993; Feldman, 
1997; Marsh & Roche, 1994; Watkins, 1994). In this 
article, we emphasize the importance of recognizing the 
multidimensionality of teaching and SETs in understand- 
ing research evidence in relation to the validity, perceived 
bias, and usefulness of SETs. This perspective is im- 
portant for administrators, program developers, and po- 
tential users in making informed decisions regarding the 
appropriate use of SETs and for future SET research. 
Multidimensionality of Teaching 
Researchers and practitioners (e.g., Abrami & d'Apol- 
Ionia, 1991; Cashin & Downey, 1992; Feldman, 1997; 
Marsh & Roche, 1993) agree that teaching is a complex 
activity consisting of multiple dimensions (e.g., clarity, 
teachers' interactions with students, organization, enthu- 
siasm) and that formative-diagnostic evaluations of 
teachers should reflect this multidimensionality (e.g., a 
teacher is organized but lacks enthusiasm). SET instru- 
ments differ in the quality of items, the way the teaching- 
effectiveness construct is operationalized, and the partic- 
ular dimensions that are included. The validity and the 
usefulness of SET information depend on the content and 
the coverage of the items. Poorly worded or inappropriate 
items will not provide useful information, whereas scores 
averaged across an ill-defined assortment of items offer 
no basis for knowing what is being measured. In practice, 
most instruments are based on a mixture of logical and 
pragmatic considerations, occasionally including some 
psychometric evidence such as reliability or factor analy- 
sis (Marsh, 1987). Valid measurement, however, requires 
a continual interplay between theory, research, and prac- 
tice. Several theoretically defensible instruments with a 
well-defined factor structure have been reviewed (Centra, 
1993; Marsh, 1987), but few have been evaluated exten- 
sively in terms of potential biases and validity. 
The strongest support for the multidimensionality of 
SETs is based on the nine-factor (Learning/Value, In- 
structor Enthusiasm, Organization/Clarity, Group Inter- 
action, Individual Rapport, Breadth of Coverage, Exami- 
nations/Grading, Assignments/Readings, and Workload/ 
Difficulty) Students' Evaluation of Educational Quality 
(SEEQ) instrument (Marsh, 1983, 1984, 1987; Marsh & 
Dunkin, 1992). These factors are based on various 
sources (e.g., reviews of current instruments, interviews 
with students and teachers) and psychometric analyses 
and were supported by Marsh and Dunkin's evaluation 
in relation to theories of teaching and learning. Factor 
analytic support is particularly strong in that more than 
30 published factor analyses have consistently identified 
the nine a priori factors across diverse settings (Marsh, 
1987). For example, factor analyses of responses by 
50,000 classes (representing responses to nearly one mil- 
Herbert W. Marsh and Lawrence A. Roche, Faculty of Education, Uni- 
versity of Western Sydney, Macarthur, Campbelltown, New South 
Wales, Australia. 
We thank Alexander Yeung as well as the other authors in this 
Current Issues section for their helpful and provocative interchange. 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to 
Herbert W. Marsh, Faculty of Education, University of Western Sydney, 
Macarthur, P.O. Box 555, Campbelltown, New South Wales 2560, Aus- 
tralia. Electronic mail may be sent via Internet to h.marsh@uws.edu.au. 
November 1997 • American Psychologist 
Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-066X/97/$2.00 
Vol. 52, No. 11, 1187-1197 
1187 

lion SEEQ surveys) provided clear support for the SEEQ 
factor structure on the basis of the total group and on 
the basis of each of 21 separate subgroups representing 
different academic disciplines and levels of instruction 
(Marsh & Hocevar, 1991a). The applicability of the SEEQ 
to diverse settings in many different countries was inves- 
tigated in studies reviewed by Watkins (1994), who con- 
cluded that "the results are certainly generally encourag- 
ing regarding the range of university settings for which 
the questionnaires and the underlying model of teaching 
effectiveness investigated here may be appropriate" 
(p. 262). 
Global or overall ratings cannot adequately repre- 
sent the multidimensionality of teaching. They also may 
be more susceptible to context, mood, and other potential 
biases than are specific items that are more closely tied 
to actual teaching behaviors, leading Frey (1978) to argue 
that they should be excluded. In the ongoing debate be- 
tween Abrami and Marsh (and their colleagues), Abrami 
and d' Apollonia (1991; Abrami, d' Apollonia, & Rosen- 
field, 1997) seemed to initially prefer the sole use of 
global ratings for personnel decisions, whereas Marsh 
(1991, 1994a) preferred a profile of scores, including the 
different SEEQ factors, global ratings, expected grades, 
and prior subject interest ratings, but they apparently 
agreed that an appropriately weighted average of specific 
SET factors may provide a workable compromise be- 
tween these two positions. Along with other research 
exploring higher order (more general) factors associated 
with SET dimensions (Abrami et al., 1997), this compro- 
mise acknowledges the underlying multidimensionality 
of SETs (Marsh, 1994a). However, it also raises the thorny 
question of how to weight the different SET components. 
Marsh and Roche (1994) suggested that for purposes of 
feedback to instructors (and perhaps for purposes of 
teachers' input into personnel decisions), it might be use- 
ful to weight SET factors according to their importance 
in a specific teaching context. Unresolved issues concern- 
ing the validity and the utility of importance-weighted 
averages (e.g., Marsh, 1994b, 1995), however, dictate 
caution in pursuing this suggestion. Continuing this de- 
bate, Abrami et al. 
• raised many concerns about factor analysis that were largely 
addressed by Marsh (1991, 1994a); 
• cited Cashin and Downey (1992) as showing that specific 
ratings add little to global ratings, but Marsh's (1994b) re- 
analysis of this study showed that the optimal subset of SETs 
(in relation to their outcome variable of students' progress 
ratings) did not even include global items; and 
• implied that specific items were less valid than global ratings 
in multisection validity studies, even though Feldman (1997) 
reported nine SET dimensions (.57 for organization, .56 for 
clarity, .46 for impact, .38 for interest stimulation, .36 for 
discussion, .36 for availability, .35 for elocution, .35 for ob- 
jectives, and .34 for knowledge) that were more highly corre- 
lated with achievement than the .32 correlation between 
achievement and global ratings reported by Abrami et al. 
Abrami et al. reported empirical support for 35 different 
first-order SET factors (and multiple items representing 
each factor) that could be represented by 4 higher order 
factors, prompting Marsh (1994a) to dub the authors as 
the new champions of the multidimensional perspective. 
Many SET instruments fail to provide a comprehen- 
sive evaluation of theoretically sound, multiple dimen- 
sions of teaching quality, thus undermining their use- 
fulness, particularly for diagnostic feedback. "Home- 
made" SET surveys constructed by lecturers or com- 
mittees are rarely evaluated in relation to rigorous psy- 
chometric considerations and revised accordingly. This 
variation in quality also complicates the interpretation 
and the generalizability of SET research. SET instru- 
ments should be designed to measure separate compo- 
nents of teaching effectiveness, and support for the con- 
struct validity of the multiple dimensions should be evalu- 
ated. The failure to recognize this multidimensionality of 
SETs undermines the ability to understand their reliabil- 
ity, validity, relation to potential biases, and utility in 
improving teaching effectiveness. 
Reliability, Stability, and Generalizability 
The reliability of SETs is most appropriately determined 
from studies of interrater agreement that assess agree- 
ment among different students within the same course 
(Gillmore, Kane, & Naccarato, 1978; Marsh, 1987). The 
correlation between responses by any two students in the 
same class (i.e., the single-rater reliability; Marsh, 1987) 
is typically in the .20s, but the reliability of the class- 
average response depends on the number of students rat- 
ing the class: .95 for 50 students, .90 for 25 students, .74 
for 10 students, and .60 for 5 students. Given a sufficient 
number of students in any one class (or, perhaps, averaged 
across different classes), the reliability of class-average 
SETs compares favorably with that of the best objective 
tests. 
Cross-sectional studies typically report that SETs 
are negatively related to age and years of teaching experi- 
ence (Feldman, 1983), although SETs may increase 
slightly during the first few years of teaching. However, 
in a longitudinal study of changes in ratings of a diverse 
sample of 195 teachers who had been evaluated continu- 
ously over a 13-year period, Marsh and Hocevar (1991b) 
found no systematic changes in any of the SEEQ factors. 
Cross-sectional studies also have shown good agree- 
ment between responses by current and former students 
(see Centra, 1979, 1993; Marsh, 1987). In a longitudinal 
study (Overall & Marsh, 1980), ratings in 100 classes 
correlated .83 with ratings by the same students when 
they again evaluated the same classes retrospectively sev- 
eral years later, at least one year after graduation. 
In trying to separate the effects of the teacher and 
the course on SETs, Marsh (1987) reported that the corre- 
lation between overall ratings of different instructors 
teaching the same course (i.e., a course effect) was -.05, 
whereas correlations for the same instructor in different 
courses (r = .61) and in two different offerings of the 
same course (r = .72) were much larger. These results 
support the validity of SETs as a measure of teacher 
effectiveness but not as a measure of the course effective- 
1188 November 1997 • American Psychologist 

ness that is independent of the teacher. Marsh and Bailey 
(1993) further demonstrated that each teacher had a char- 
acteristic profile on the nine SEEQ scores (e.g., high on 
Organization/Clarity but low on Enthusiasm) that was 
distinct from the profiles of other instructors and general- 
ized across course offerings over a 13-year period. Such 
instructor-specific profiles have important implications 
for the use of SETs as feedback and for their relation 
to other criteria such as students' learning. The results 
also provide further support for the multidimensionality 
of SETs and the generalizability of multidimensional 
profiles. 
Gillmore et al. (1978), applying generalizability the- 
ory to SETs, suggested that ratings for a given instructor 
should be averaged across different courses to enhance 
generalizability--as many as possible for personnel deci- 
sions (they suggested at least five). These recommenda- 
tions require maintenance of a longitudinal SET archive 
that would provide the basis for more generalizable sum- 
maries, the assessment of changes over time, the determi- 
nation of which particular courses are best taught by 
a specific instructor, and more informed personnel 
decisions. 
Validity 
SETs are difficult to validate because no single criterion 
of effective teaching is sufficient (Marsh, 1987, 1994b, 
1995). Historically, researchers have emphasized a nar- 
row definition of students' learning--typically opera- 
tionalized by performance on multiple-choice tests in 
multisection validity studies (see discussion in the Stu- 
dents' Learning: The Multisection Validity Study sec- 
tion)--as the only criterion of effective teaching. We 
categorically reject the appropriateness of this narrow 
criterion-related approach to validity that inhibits a better 
understanding of what SETs measure, of other important 
criteria of effective teaching, and of the development of 
a common framework. Marsh (1987) advocated an alter- 
native construct-validation approach in which SETs are 
posited to be positively related to a wide variety of other 
indicators of effective teaching and specific SET factors 
are posited to be most highly correlated with variables 
to which they are most logically and theoretically related. 
Within this framework, evidence for the long-term stabil- 
ity of SETs, the generalizability of ratings of the same 
instructor in different courses, and the agreement in rat- 
ings of current and former students supports the validity 
of SETs. The most widely accepted criteria of effective 
teaching involve students' learning (which can be mea- 
sured in quite different ways), but many other criteria, 
such as those considered here, should be studied. A con- 
struct-validity approach to the study of SETs now appears 
to be widely accepted (e.g., Cashin, 1988; Howard, Con- 
way, & Maxwell, 1985) but requires reliable criterion 
measures that validly reflect effective teaching. Unrelia- 
ble or invalid criterion measures should not be used as 
indicators of effective teaching for research, policy for- 
mation, feedback to faculty, or personnel decisions. 
Students" Learning: The Mullisedion Validity 
study 
Students' learning, even when inferred from standardized 
examinations, typically cannot be compared across dif- 
ferent courses. In multisection validity studies (in which 
multiple sections of the same course are taught by differ- 
ent teachers and evaluated with the same final examina- 
tion), however, it may be valid to compare teachers in 
terms of operationally defined learning that can be related 
to SETs. Despite methodological problems (Marsh, 1987; 
Marsh & Dunkin, 1992), meta-analyses of multisection 
validity studies have demonstrated that the sections with 
the highest SETs are also the sections that perform best 
on standardized final examinations. Cohen (1987), in his 
summary of 41 well-designed studies, reported that the 
mean correlations between students' achievement and 
different SET components were .55 for structure, .52 for 
interaction, .50 for skill, .49 for overall course, .45 for 
overall instructor, .39 for learning, .32 for rapport, .30 
for evaluation, .28 for feedback, .15 for interest/motiva- 
tion, and -.04 for difficulty, in which all but the last two 
were statistically significant. Validity coefficients tend to 
be higher for some more specific SET components (Feld- 
man, 1989a, 1997) and for multi-item scales instead of 
single items (Cohen, 1987). This research demonstrates 
that SETs reflect students' learning. 
Evaluations of Teaching Effectiveness by Different 
Evaluators 
Teaching effectiveness can be evaluated by current stu- 
dents, former students, the teacher himself or herself, 
colleagues, administrators, or trained observers. Teach- 
ers' self-evaluations are useful because they can be col- 
lected in all educational settings, are likely to be persua- 
sive for at least the teachers evaluating their own teaching, 
may be important in interventions designed to improve 
teaching, and provide insight into how teachers view their 
own teaching. Feldman's (1989b) meta-analysis of corre- 
lations between SETS and self-evaluations reported mean 
correlations between. 15 and .42 for specific SET compo- 
nents and a mean correlation of .29 for overall ratings. In 
two studies with large numbers of teachers and students 
evaluating teaching with the SEEQ (Marsh, 1987), (a) 
separate factor analyses of SETs and self-evaluations 
identified the same SEEQ factors, (b) student-teacher 
agreement on every dimension was significant (median 
rs of .49 and .45 between SETs and teachers' self-evalua- 
tions in the two studies) and was typically larger than 
agreement on overall teaching effectiveness (r = .32), 
(c) mean differences between students' and faculty mem- 
bers' responses were small, and (d) multitrait-multi- 
method analyses supported the convergent validity and 
the discriminant validity of the multidimensional ratings. 
Colleagues' and administrators' ratings based on 
classroom visitations are not very reliable (i.e., ratings 
by different peers do not even agree with each other) 
and are not systematically correlated with SETs or other 
indicators of effective teaching (see Centra, 1979; 
Koon & Murray, 1996; Marsh, 1987; Murray, 1980). 
November 1997 ° American Psychologist 1189 

However, trained external observers may accurately rate 
some specific classroom teaching behaviors (Marsh, 
1987; Murray, 1980). For example, Cranton and Hillgar- 
ten (1981) examined relationships between SETs and spe- 
cific teaching behaviors observed during videotaped lec- 
tures in a naturalistic setting: SETs of effectiveness of 
discussion were higher "when professors praised student 
behavior, asked questions and clarified or elaborated stu- 
dent responses" (p. 73), and SETs of organization were 
higher "when instructors spent time structuring classes 
and explaining relationships" (p. 73). Murray (1983) 
found that total reports based on 18-24 observations per 
teacher clearly differentiated between teachers who had 
previously received high, medium, and low SETs. The 
average observation reports for each teacher were reliable 
(even though responses by a single observer were not), 
and factor analysis of the observations resulted in nine 
factors like those found in SETs (e.g., Clarity, Enthusi- 
asm, Interaction, Rapport, Organization). These studies 
show that SETs are logically related to observable teach- 
ing behaviors. 
Howard et al. (1985; also see Feldman, 1989a, 
1989b; Marsh & Dunkin, 1992) compared evaluations 
by current students, former students, a colleague, and 
eight trained observers. They concluded that "former- 
student and student ratings evidence substantially greater 
validity coefficients of teaching effectiveness than do 
self-report, colleague, and trained observer ratings" (p. 
195). Whereas self-evaluations were modestly correlated 
with current SETs (.34) and former SETs (.31), col- 
leagues' and observers' ratings were not significantly cor- 
related with each other, current SETs, or self-evaluations. 
Future Directions 
There is no adequate single indicator of effective teach- 
ing. Hence, the validity of SETs or of any other indicator 
of effective teaching must be demonstrated through a 
construct-validation approach. SETs are significantly and 
consistently related to ratings by former students, stu- 
dents' achievement in multisection validity studies, teach- 
ers' self-evaluations, and extensive observations of 
trained observers on specific processes such as teachers' 
clarity. This pattern of results supports their construct 
validity. Marsh (1987; Marsh & Dunkin, 1992) also dis- 
cussed the validity of SETs in relation to other important 
outcomes such as students' motivation, affective criteria, 
subsequent course-work selection, students' study strate- 
gies, and the quality of students' learning. In contrast, 
research productivity (Hattie & Marsh, 1996) and peers' 
ratings based on classroom visitations are not systemati- 
cally related to SETs or other indicators of effective teach- 
ing, calling into question their validity as measures of 
effective teaching. Although most researchers agree that 
it is necessary to have multiple indicators of effective 
teaching--particularly for personnel decisions--it is 
critical that the validity of all indicators of teaching effec- 
tiveness, not just SETs, be systematically examined be- 
fore they are actually used. The heavy reliance on SETs 
as the primary measure of teaching effectiveness stems 
in part from the lack of support for the validity of any 
other indicators of effective teaching. This lack of viable 
alternatives--rather than a bias in favor of SETs--seems 
to explain why SETs are used so much more widely than 
other indicators of effective teaching. 
Within the construct-validity approach, it is im- 
portant to relate SETs to a wide variety of criteria of 
effective teaching. For example, there is too little research 
relating multidimensional SETs to important student out- 
comes such as motivation, self-concept, affect, metacog- 
nition, study strategies, course-work selection, career as- 
pirations, and so forth. Another important element of 
construct validation for SETs is the need to relate SETs to 
actual classroom processes. Experimentally manipulated 
teaching situations provide an underutilized but poten- 
tially powerful research tool in this area (e.g., Marsh & 
Ware, 1982; described below in The Dr. Fox Effect 
section). 
Potential Biases in Students" Evaluations 
The voluminous literature on potential biases in SETs is 
frequently atheoretical, methodologically flawed, and not 
based on well-articulated operational definitions of bias, 
thus continuing to fuel (and be fueled or fooled by) SET 
myths (Feldman, 1997; Marsh, 1987). Marsh listed im- 
portant methodological problems in this research, includ- 
ing (a) implying causation from correlation; (b) use of 
an inappropriate unit of analysis (the class average is 
usually appropriate, whereas the individual student is 
rarely appropriate); (c) negligence of the multivariate na- 
ture of SETs and potential biases; (d) inappropriate opera- 
tional definitions of bias and potential biasing variables; 
and (e) inappropriate experimental manipulations. 
Support for a bias hypothesis, as with the study of 
validity, must be based on a construct-validation ap- 
proach. If a potential bias (e.g., class size) has a similar 
influence on multiple indicators of teaching effectiveness 
(e.g., SETs, self-evaluations, test scores), then the effect 
may reflect a valid influence on teaching effectiveness. 
Similarly, if the pattern of relations between a particular 
background variable and multiple dimensions of SET 
matches a priori predictions, then the results may support 
the construct validity of the SETs instead of a bias. For 
example, the SEEQ factors most logically related to class 
size are Group Interaction and Individual Rapport. Em- 
pirical results indicate that class size is moderately corre- 
lated with these two SEEQ factors and nearly uncorre- 
lated with other SEEQ factors (or even positively related 
to Organization/Clarity) and that a similar pattern is ob- 
served in instructors' self-evaluations of their own teach- 
ing. These results suggest that class size actually does 
affect Group Interaction and Individual Rapport in a man- 
ner that is accurately reflected in SETs and instructors' 
self-evaluations, supporting the construct validity of 
SETs in relation to class size--not a class-size "bias" 
in SETs. 
Marsh (1987; also see Centra, 1979) reviewed sev- 
eral large studies of the multivariate relationship between 
a comprehensive set of background characteristics and 
1190 November 1997 • American Psychologist 

SETs. In two such studies, 16 background characteristics 
explained about 13% of the variance in the set of SEEQ 
dimensions but varied substantially depending on the 
SEEQ factor. Four background variables could account 
for most of the explained variance: SETs were correlated 
with higher prior subject interest, higher expected grades, 
higher levels of Workload/Difficulty, and a higher per- 
centage of students taking the course for general interest 
only. Path analyses demonstrated that prior subject inter- 
est had the strongest impact on SETs and that this variable 
also accounted for about one third of the expected-grade 
effect. However, even these relatively modest relations 
apparently did not reflect biases. The Workload/Difficulty 
relation was in the opposite direction than that predicted 
by a bias (SETs were higher--not lower--in more diffi- 
cult classes; SETs were lower in "Mickey Mouse" 
courses). Prior subject interest primarily influenced rat- 
ings of Learning/Value and overall course ratings, and a 
similar pattern of relations was found with teachers' self- 
evaluations. The most contentious relation, perhaps, was 
the expected-grade effect, which we consider next. 
Expected Grades 
What is the size of the relation between class-average 
expected grades and SETs? Marsh (1987) argued that the 
class average is the appropriate unit of analysis, reporting 
correlations between class-average SETs and expected 
grades varying from -.02 (Breadth of Coverage) to .29 
(Learning/Value), .31 (Group Interaction), and .22 and 
.20 for overall course and teacher ratings. The higher 
correlation with Learning/value (also observed with 
teachers' self-evaluations) is predictable because ex- 
pected grades reflect, in part, a measure of learning, 
whereas the higher Group Interaction relation may reflect 
higher grades in advanced-level seminar courses that fa- 
cilitate student-teacher interaction. Correlations for 
global ratings are consistent with the extensive review of 
this relation reported by Feldman (1976). The single best 
estimate (based on 9,194 class-average responses from a 
diversity of different universities, courses, settings, and 
situations) is probably the .20 value reported by Centra 
and Creech (1976). More recently, Feldman (1997) con- 
cluded that correlations are usually between, l0 and .30. 
Hence, the best estimate of the size of the relation is 
probably about .20 and certainly no higher than .30. 
There are at least three very different interpretations 
of this relation (Marsh, 1987) and some support for each. 
First, the grading-leniency hypothesis proposes that in- 
structors who give higher-than-deserved grades will be 
rewarded with higher-than-deserved SETs, which consti- 
tutes a serious bias to SETs. According to this hypothesis, 
it is not expected grades per se that influence SETs but 
rather the teacher's leniency in assigning grades. Second, 
the validity hypothesis proposes that better expected 
grades reflect better learning by students and that a posi- 
tive correlation between students' learning and SETs sup- 
ports the validity of SETs. Third, the students' character- 
istics hypothesis proposes that preexisting student vari- 
ables such as prior subject interest may affect students' 
learning, students' grades, and teaching effectiveness, so 
that the expected-grade effect is spurious. Although these 
and related explanations of the expected-grade effect 
have quite different implications, grades must surely re- 
flect some combination of students' learning, the instruc- 
tor's grading standards, and students' characteristics. 
Multisection validity studies. In these studies 
(reviewed earlier), sections of a multisection course that 
performed best on a standardized final examination also 
gave the most favorable SETs. Because preexisting differ- 
ences and grading leniency are largely controlled in these 
studies, the results provide strong support for the validity 
hypothesis. Because the size of correlations between ac- 
tual achievement and SETs in multisection validity stud- 
ies tend to be as large or larger than the typical expected- 
grade correlation, it seems that much of this relationship 
reflects the valid effects of students' learning on SETs. 
This research provides the strongest basis for the inter- 
pretation of the expected-grade effect of any research 
considered here. 
Experimental Reid studies. Marsh (1984, 1987; 
Marsh & Dunkin, 1992; also see Abrami, Dickens, 
Perry, & Leventhal, 1980; Howard & Maxwell, 1982) 
reviewed experimental field studies purporting to demon- 
strate a grading-leniency effect on SETs but concluded 
that the research was weak and flawed. In marked con- 
trast, Haskell (1997) summarized work implying that 
these studies provide good evidence for a grading- 
leniency effect, even suggesting an implicit collusion 
among SET researchers to hide this conclusion. It is im- 
portant to counter such dubious but popular interpreta- 
tions, because the use of deception in these studies would 
presumably fail to meet current ethical standards, making 
the studies difficult to replicate or refine. Here, we briefly 
elaborate four crippling weaknesses of these studies by 
Chacko (1983), Holmes (1972), Powell (1977), Vasta and 
Sarmiento (1979), and Worthington and Wong (1979), 
and one subsequent study by Blunt (1991). 
The first weakness relates to the ambiguity of decep- 
tion research. The use of deception as applied in these 
studies (e.g., reporting false course grades to students, 
thereby violating students' reasonable grade expecta- 
tions, sometimes quite seriously) is not only ethically 
dubious but also methodologically suspect and, as with 
other deception research (see Lawson, 1997), is unlikely 
to produce unambiguous, generalizable results. 
The second weakness relates to design. In all six of 
the aforementioned studies, the researchers themselves 
taught classes in which the students from one large class 
were randomly assigned to different "grading" groups 
(Blunt, 1991; Holmes, 1972; Worthington & Wong, 1979) 
or intact (supposedly equivalent) sections of the same 
class were graded differently (Chacko, 1983; Powell, 
1977; Vasta & Sarmiento, 1979). Hence, there was lim- 
ited generalizability in all of the studies, potential re- 
searcher expectancy effects in three studies, and true ran- 
dom assignment in only three studies. 
The third weakness relates to grading-leniency ma- 
nipulations. These manipulations do not reflect typical, 
November 1997 • American Psychologist 1191 

naturally occurring leniency variation, where students 
have reasonably accurate grade expectations based on 
feedback about their actual performance but have not yet 
received their final grades when completing SETs. In 
some studies, the experimental manipulation intention- 
ally violated reasonable grade expectations based on ac- 
tual performance (Blunt, 1991; Holmes, 1972), grades 
that had no relation to students' actual performance were 
assigned completely at random (Worthington & Wong, 
1979), or students were likely to be aware that they re- 
ceived grades different from those of other students in 
the same class performing at the same level (Vasta & 
Sarmiento, 1979; Worthington & Wong, 1979; and maybe 
Holmes, 1972; Powell, 1977). In one case (Powell, 1977, 
Study 1), the manipulation was a change in instructional 
design that was claimed to affect learning, effort, and 
actual examination performance (and thus was more than 
a grading-leniency manipulation) or did not involve a 
manipulation of grading leniency at all (Powell, 1977, 
Study 2). The size of the manipulation (e.g., ___one letter 
grade--a two-letter grade difference) sometimes seemed 
large relative to typical variation (Blunt, 1991; Holmes, 
1972; Worthington & Wong, 1979; and maybe Chacko, 
1983). In most cases, the final manipulated grade was 
presented (and emphasized) immediately before SETs 
were collected (Blunt, 1991; Chacko, 1983; Holmes, 
1972; Worthington & Wong, 1979), enhancing the sali- 
ency of the grades or violations of reasonable grade ex- 
pectations. In actual practice, most teachers assign grades 
that are consistent with expectations they have given stu- 
dents and are monotonic with actual performance ac- 
cording to standards known by students; they do not 
intentionally mislead students into thinking that they will 
receive higher or lower grades than they actually receive. 
Overall, the manipulations seem quite inappropriate. 
The fourth weakness relates to results. The pub- 
lished results typically do not provide adequate informa- 
tion to compute effect sizes in any straightforward man- 
ner, but the proportions of statistically significant differ- 
ences between groups (for different SET items) suggest 
the effects were weak: 2/10 (Blunt, 1991), 5/19 (Holmes, 
1972), and 7/50 (Vasta & Sarmiento, 1979; apparently 
based--inappropriately--on one-tailed tests and on one 
significant effect in the opposite direction). Worthington 
and Wong (1979) reported 10/23 significant differences 
between students who were randomly assigned "satisfac- 
tory" and "poor" grades, but they reported only 1/23 
significant differences between students assigned 
"good" and "satisfactory or poor" grades (suggesting a 
grading-strictness effect but no grading-leniency effect). 
Chacko (1983) and Powell (1977) reported no signifi- 
cance tests of between-groups differences (although 
Chacko did report before-after tests for each group sepa- 
rately). In many cases, significant (or apparently largest) 
differences were for items related to grades and grading 
fairness (Holmes, 1972; Powell, 1977; Vasta & Sar- 
miento, 1979; Worthington & Wong, 1979), which might 
logically be expected to be lower, given the nature of the 
manipulation. 
In summary, this set of experimental field studies is 
methodologically weak, ethically indefensible, unrepre- 
sentative of naturally occurring differences in grading 
leniency (to the extent that manipulations represent grad- 
ing leniency at all), and weak in terms of the results. To 
illustrate the unrepresentative nature of these studies, note 
that there are likely to be large differences between (ma- 
nipulated) assigned grades and expected grades in these 
studies, whereas in practice, expected and actual grades 
are very similar. In summary, suggestions that this re- 
search supports a grading-leniency bias are unwarranted. 
Laboratory studies. Abrami et al. (1980) con- 
ducted what appears to be the most methodologically 
sound study of experimentally manipulated grading stan- 
dards in two "Dr. Fox"-type experiments (see The Dr. 
Fox Effect section below). Groups of students viewed 
a videotaped lecture, rated teachers' effectiveness, and 
completed an examination. When the students returned 
two weeks later, they were given their examination results 
and a grade based on their actual performance but scaled 
according to different standards (i.e., an "average" grade 
earning a B, a C+, or a C). Students then viewed a similar 
videotaped lecture, again evaluated teachers' effective- 
ness, and were tested again. The grading-leniency manip- 
ulation had no effect on achievement and weak, inconsis- 
tent effects on SETs, failing to support a grading-leniency 
interpretation. 
Other nonexperimental approaches. Path- 
analytic studies (see Marsh, 1983, 1987) demonstrate that 
about one third of the expected-grade effect is explained 
in terms of prior subject interest. In addressing the issue 
of how much of the remaining expected-grade effect can 
be attributed to grading leniency, Howard and Maxwell 
(1980, 1982) found that most of the covariation between 
expected grades and SETs was eliminated by controlling 
for students' prior motivation and students' progress rat- 
ings--an indicator of students' learning--suggesting al- 
most no variance due to grading leniency. 
In one of the few studies to directly measure grading 
leniency, Marsh (1987) reported that correlations be- 
tween teachers' self-perceptions of their own grading le- 
niency (rated on a scale ranging from easy~lenient grader 
to hard~strict grader) and both students' and teachers' 
evaluations of effective teaching were small (rs ranged 
from -. 16 to. 19), except for ratings of Workload/Diffi- 
culty (rs of .26 for students' ratings and .28 for teachers' 
ratings) and teachers' self-evaluations of Examinations/ 
Grading (r = .32). On the basis of a separate study, Marsh 
(1987) reported that self-reported easy graders received 
somewhat (significantly) lower overall course and Learn- 
ing/Value ratings. Hence, results based on this direct mea- 
sure of grading leniency argue against the grading- 
leniency hypothesis. 
Summary of expected-grade effects. In sum- 
mary, evidence from a variety of different studies clearly 
supports the validity and students' characteristics hypoth- 
eses. Whereas a grading-leniency effect may produce 
some bias in SETs, support for this suggestion is weak, 
and the size of such an effect is likely to be unsubstantial. 
1192 November 1997 • American Psychologist 

In future grading-leniency research, theoretically 
defensible operational definitions must be developed. 
Thus, for example, grading leniency seems to be an attri- 
bute of the teacher--not individual students within a 
class--so that relations should be based on class-average 
results; correlations based on grades and individual SETs 
within a class seem irrelevant to grading-leniency effects. 
Furthermore, even class-average expected grades provide 
only a weak, indirect indicator of grading leniency; more 
direct measures are required. Studies that assume that 
high class-average grades reflect grading leniency should 
be interpreted cautiously. Experimental field studies that 
have manipulated grading leniency appear to be of lim- 
ited usefulness because of basic design flaws as well as 
the methodological and ethical shortcomings of decep- 
tion-based research, although laboratory experimental 
studies like those by Abrami et al. (1980) seem more 
promising. Simple correlational studies seem to be of 
limited usefulness, but path-analytic approaches are more 
promising--depending on the variables included. We 
also find it curious that expected-grade effects are not 
discussed in relation to multisection validity studies, 
where students' learning is consistently correlated with 
SETs in a setting where background characteristics and 
grading-leniency effects are largely controlled. In this 
highly regarded design, there is clear evidence for the 
validity hypothesis that is not contaminated with grading- 
leniency effects, and the sizes of these effects are typi- 
cally as large or larger than expected-grade effects re- 
ported elsewhere. More generally, this seems like an ideal 
setting in which to blend qualitative research techniques 
(on the nature of expected grades and grading leniency) 
and quantitative techniques that have largely dominated 
SET research. 
The Dr. Fox Effect 
The Dr. Fox effect is defined as the overriding influence 
of instructors' expressiveness on SETs and has been inter- 
preted to mean that enthusiastic lecturers can "seduce" 
students into giving favorable evaluations, even though 
the lectures may be devoid of meaningful content. The 
original Dr. Fox study, as noted by its authors and critics 
alike, was fraught with methodological weaknesses 
(see Abrami, Leventhal, & Perry, 1982; Marsh, 1987; 
Marsh & Ware, 1982), but the original results were seized 
by some as support for the invalidity of SETs. To over- 
come some methodological problems, the standard Dr. 
Fox paradigm was developed, where a series of six video- 
taped lectures--representing three levels of course con- 
tent (the number of substantive teaching points covered) 
and two levels of lecture expressiveness (the expressive- 
ness with which a professional actor delivered the lec- 
ture)--were presented by the same actor (who was called 
Dr. Fox). Students viewed one of the six lectures, evalu- 
ated teaching effectiveness on a multidimensional SET 
instrument, and completed an achievement test based on 
all the teaching points in the high-content lecture. Abrami 
et al.'s (1982) meta-analysis concluded that expressive- 
ness manipulations had substantial impacts on overall 
SETs and small effects on achievement whereas content 
manipulations had substantial effects on achievement and 
small effects on SETs. 
In reanalyses of the original Dr. Fox studies, Marsh 
and Ware (1982) identified five SET factors that were 
differentially affected by the experimental manipulations. 
Particularly in the condition most like the university class- 
room, where students were given incentives to do well 
on the achievement test, the Dr. Fox effect was not sup- 
ported in that (a) the instructor-expressiveness manipula- 
tion affected only Instructor Enthusiasm, the factor most 
logically related to that manipulation and (b) content cov- 
erage significantly affected Instructor Knowledge and 
Organization/Clarity, the factors most logically related to 
that manipulation. When students were given no incen- 
tives to perform well, instructor expressiveness had more 
impact on all five SET factors (although the effect on 
Instructor Enthusiasm was still the largest), but expres- 
siveness also had more impact on achievement scores 
than did the content manipulation (i.e., presentation style 
had more to do with how well students performed on the 
examination than did the number of questions that had 
been covered in the lecture). Hence, as in other studies 
of potential biases, this reanalysis indicates the impor- 
tance of the multidimensionality of SETs. An effect that 
has been interpreted as a "bias" to SETs seems more 
appropriately interpreted as support for their validity with 
respect to one component of effective teaching. 
Summary of Potential Bias Interpretations 
A summary of typical relationships between background 
characteristics and students' ratings based on the work of 
many researchers (see reviews by Marsh, 1987; Marsh & 
Dunkin, 1992) is presented in Table 1. Whereas a com- 
prehensive review of potential biases is beyond the scope 
of this article, perhaps the best summary is McKeachie' s 
(1979) conclusion that a wide variety of variables that 
could potentially influence SETs apparently have little 
effect. 
Utility of Students" Evaluations of 
Teaching: Improving Teaching Quality 
There is substantial testimonial evidence as well as exper- 
imental evidence supporting the usefulness of SETs (Cen- 
tra, 1993; Marsh & Dunkin, 1992; Marsh & Roche, 
1994). In most SET feedback studies, teachers are ran- 
domly assigned to experimental (feedback) or one or 
more control groups; SETs are collected during the term; 
SETs of the teachers in the feedback group are quickly 
returned to instructors; and the various groups are com- 
pared on subsequent SETs and, sometimes, other criterion 
variables. In Cohen's (1980) meta-analysis, instructors 
in feedback groups were subsequently rated 0.30 standard 
deviations higher than controls on a total rating, and even 
larger differences were observed for ratings of Instructor 
Skill, Attitude Toward Subject, and Feedback to Students. 
Studies that augmented feedback with consultation pro- 
November 1997 • American Psychologist 1193 

Table 1 
Overview of Relationships Found Between Students" Ratings and Background Characteristics 
Background characteristic Summary of findings 
Prior subject interest 
Expected grade-actual grade 
Reason for taking a course 
Workload -difficulty 
Class size 
Level of course or year in school 
Instructor's rank 
Sex of instructor or student 
Academic discipline 
Purpose of ratings 
Administrative conditions 
Students' personality 
Classes with higher interest rate classes more favorably, although it is not always clear if 
interest existed before the start of the course or was generated by the course or the 
instructor. 
Class-average grades are correlated with class-average students' evaluations of teaching, 
but the interpretation depends on whether higher grades represent grading leniency, 
superior learning, or preexisting differences. 
Elective courses and those with a higher percentage of students taking the course for 
general interest tend to be rated higher. 
Harder, more difficult courses requiring more effort and time are rated somewhat more 
favorably. 
Mixed findings but most studies show smaller classes are rated somewhat more favorably, 
although some find curvilinear relationships where large classes also are rated favorably. 
Graduate-level courses are rated somewhat more favorably; weak, inconsistent findings 
suggest upper division courses are rated higher than lower division courses. 
Mixed findings but little or no effect. 
Mixed findings but little or no effect. 
Weak tendency for higher ratings in humanities and lower ratings in sciences, but too few 
studies to be clear. 
Somewhat higher ratings if ratings are known to be used for tenure-promotion decisions. 
Somewhat higher if ratings are not anonymous and the instructor is present when ratings 
are being completed. 
Mixed findings but apparently little effect, particularly because different "personality types" 
may appear in somewhat similar numbers in different classes. 
Note. Particularly for the more widely studied characteristics, some studies have found little or no relation or even results opposite to those reported here. The size, 
or even the direction, of relations may vary considerably, depending on the particular component of students' ratings that is being considered. Few studies have 
found any of these characteristics to be correlated more than .30 with class-average students' ratings, and most relations are much smaller. 
duced substantially larger differences, but other method- 
ological variations had little effect. Overall and Marsh 
(1979) also showed that feedback with consultation led 
to improved examination performance and affective out- 
comes as well as higher SETs. The most robust finding 
from this research is that consultation augments the SET 
effects, but there is insufficient information about the 
most effective type of consultative feedback. 
The use of norms helps teachers to determine their 
relative strengths and weaknesses, because raw scores on 
different factors are not directly comparable (e.g., 3.5 on 
a 5-point scale for Organization/Clarity does not indicate 
whether Organization/Clarity is good, and 3.75 on Enthu- 
siasm may not be better than 3.5 on Organization/Clar- 
ity). If, however, the mean Organization/Clarity rating in 
similar courses is 4.0, then a 3.5 suggests that a particular 
teacher may need to improve his or her organization. 
Also, the presentation of graphic profiles emphasizes a 
teacher's relative strengths and weaknesses across differ- 
ent dimensions rather than comparisons with other teach- 
ers, a feature that may offset any demotivation produced 
by receiving below-average SETs. 
Marsh and Roche (1993) reviewed different forms 
of feedback, evaluated a feedback-consultation interven- 
tion adapted from Wilson (1986), and compared the ef- 
fects of midterm and end-of-term feedback. Teachers 
completed self-evaluations and were evaluated by stu- 
dents at the middle of Semester 1 and at the end of 
Semesters 1 and 2. Three randomly assigned groups re- 
ceived the intervention at the midterm of Semester 1, at 
the end of Semester 1, or not at all (control). A key 
component was a booklet of teaching strategies for each 
SEEQ factor. Teachers selected the SEEQ factor to be 
targeted in their individually structured intervention and 
then selected the most appropriate strategies from strate- 
gies for that factor. Ratings for all groups improved, but 
improvement was significantly greater in the intervention 
groups than in the control group. The intervention was 
particularly effective for the initially least effective teach- 
ers, and the end-of-term feedback was more effective 
than the midterm feedback. For the intervention groups 
(as compared with the control group), targeted dimen- 
sions improved substantially more than nontargeted di- 
mensions. The study further demonstrated that SET feed- 
back and consultation are an effective means to improve 
teaching effectiveness and provided a useful procedure 
for providing feedback-consultation. It is important to 
note that this intervention can be conducted only with a 
well-designed, multidimensional instrument like the 
SEEQ and that the specificity of the intervention effects 
to the targeted dimensions further supports the construct 
validity of multidimensional SETs. 
1194 November 1997 • American Psychologist 

Conclusions and Implications 
Confusion about the validity and the effectiveness of 
SETs will continue as long as the various distinct compo- 
nents of students' ratings are treated as a single "puree" 
rather than as the "apples and oranges" that make up 
effective teaching. In evaluating the validity and the use- 
fulness of SETs, practitioners and researchers are encour- 
aged to consider whether proper account has been taken 
of the distinct components of students' ratings that reflect 
the multidimensionality of effective teaching. SET instru- 
ments differ markedly in their ability to measure these 
distinct components, and as Abrami et al. (1997) showed, 
no amount of factor analytic gymnastics is able to salvage 
apples and oranges from pureed questions. Multidimen- 
sionality is important not only because of its obvious 
diagnostic utility as instructor feedback but also because 
it provides a more sophisticated and realistic assessment 
of the various aspects of teaching. Thus, various contex- 
tual variables, possible biasing influences, and validity all 
can be investigated more systematically and productively, 
rather than lumping all the different dimensions into a 
puree and then trying to separate out the causal 
ingredients ! 
REFERENCES 
Abrami, E C., & d'Apollonia, S. (1991). Multidimensional students' 
evaluations of teaching effectiveness--Generalizability of "N = 1" 
research: Comment on Marsh (1991). Journal of Educational Psy- 
chology, 30, 221-227. 
Abrami, E C., d'Apollonia, S., & Rosenfield, S. (1997). The dimension- 
ality of student ratings of instruction: What we know and what we 
do not. In R. E Perry & J.C. Smart (Eds.), Effective teaching in 
higher education: Research and practice (pp. 321-367). New York: 
Agathon Press. 
Abrami, E C., Dickens, W. J., Perry, R. E, & Leventhal, L. (1980). Do 
teacher standards for assigning grades affect student evaluations of 
instruction? Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 107-118. 
Abrami, E C., Leventhal, L., & Perry, R. E (1982). Educational seduc- 
tion. Review of Educational Research, 52, 446-464. 
Blunt, A. (1991). The effects of anonymity and manipulated grades on 
student ratings of instructors. Community College Review, 18, 48- 
54. 
Cashin, W. E. (1988). Student ratings of teaching: A summary of re- 
search (IDEA Paper No. 20). Manhattan: Kansas State University, 
Division of Continuing Education. 
Cashin, W. E., & Downey, R. G. (1992). Using global student rating 
items for summative evaluation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
84, 563-572. 
Centra, J. A. (1979). Determining faculty effectiveness. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Centra, J. A. (1993). Reflective faculty evaluation. San Francisco: Jos- 
sey-Bass. 
Centra, J. A., & Creech, E R. (1976). The relationship between student, 
teacher, and course characteristics and student ratings of teacher 
effectiveness (Project Rep. No. 76-1). Princeton, NJ: Educational 
Testing Service. 
Chacko, T I. (1983). Student ratings of instruction: A function of grad- 
ing standards. Educational Research Quarterly, 8, 19-25. 
Cohen, E A. (1980). Effectiveness of student-rating feedback for im- 
proving college instruction: A meta-analysis. Research in Higher 
Education, 13, 321-341. 
Cohen, E A. (1987, April). A critical analysis and reanalysis of the 
multisection validity meta-analysis. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Wash- 
ington, DC. 
Cranton, E A., & Hillgarten, W. (1981). The relationships between 
student ratings and instructor behavior: Implications for improving 
teaching. Canadian Journal of Higher Education, 11, 73-81. 
d'Apollonia, S., & Abrami, E C. (1997). Navigating student ratings of 
instruction. American Psychologist, 52, 1198-1208. 
Feldman, K.A. (1976). Grades and college students' evaluations of 
their courses and teachers. Research in Higher Education, 4, 69- 
111. 
Feldman, K. A. (1983). The seniority and instructional experience of 
college teachers as related to the evaluations they receive from their 
students. Research in Higher Education, 18, 3-124. 
Feldman, K. A. (1989a). Association between student ratings of specific 
instructional dimensions and student achievement: Refining and ex- 
tending the synthesis of data from multisection validity studies. Re- 
search in Higher Education, 30, 583-645. 
Feldman, K. A. (1989b). Instructional effectiveness of college teachers 
as judged by teachers themselves, current and former students, col- 
leagues, administrators, and external (neutral) observers. Research 
in Higher Education, 30, 137-194. 
Feldman, K. A. (1997), Identifying exemplary teachers and teaching: 
Evidence from student ratings. In R. P. Perry & J. C. Smart (Eds.), 
Effective teaching in higher education: Research and practice (pp. 
368-395). New York: Agathon Press. 
Frey, P.W. (1978). A two-dimensional analysis of student ratings of 
instruction. Research in Higher Education, 9, 69-91. 
Gillmore, G. M., Kane, M. T., & Naccarato, R. W. (1978). The general- 
izability of student ratings of instruction: Estimates of teacher and 
course components. Journal of Educational Measurement, 15, 1- 
13. 
Greenwald, A.G. (1997a). Do manipulated course grades influence 
student ratings of instructors? A small meta-analysis. Manuscript in 
preparation. 
Greenwald, A. G. (1997b). Validity concerns and usefulness of student 
ratings of instruction. American Psychologist, 52, 1182-1186. 
Greenwald, A. G., & Gillmore, G.M. (1997). Grading leniency is a 
removable contaminant of student ratings. American Psychologist, 
52, 1209-1217. 
Haskell, R. (1997). Academic freedom, tenure and student evaluation 
of faculty: Galloping polls in the 21st century. Education Policy 
Analysis Archives, 5. Retrieved from World Wide Web: hap:/ 
olam.ed.asu.edu/epaa/ 
Hattie, J., & Marsh, H. W. (1996). The relationship between research 
and teaching in universities. Review of Educational Research, 66, 
507-542. 
Holmes, D. S. (1972). Effects of grades and disconfirmed grade expec- 
tancies on students' evaluations of their instructor. Journal of Educa- 
tional Psychology, 63, 130-133. 
Howard, G. S., Conway, C. G., & Maxwell, S.E. (1985). Construct 
validity of measures of college teaching effectiveness. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 77, 187-196. 
Howard, G. S., & Maxwell, S. E. (1980). The correlation between stu- 
dent satisfaction and grades: A case of mistaken causation? Journal 
of Educational Psychology, 72, 810-820. 
Howard, G. S., & Maxwell, S. E, (1982). Do grades contaminate student 
evaluations of instruction? Research in Higher Education, 16, 175- 
188. 
Koon, J., & Murray, H. G. (1996). Using multiple outcomes to validate 
student ratings of overall teacher effectiveness. Journal of Higher 
Education, 66, 61-81. 
Lawson, E. (1997). Deception research: After 30 years of controversy. 
In M. Bibby (Ed.), Ethics and educational research (pp. 15-48). 
Coldwater, Victoria, Australia: Australian Association of Research in 
Education. 
Marsh, H. W. (1983). Multidimensional ratings of teaching effectiveness 
by students from different academic settings and their relation to 
student/course/instructor characteristics. Journal of Educational Psy- 
chology, 75, 150-166. 
Marsh, H. W. (1984). Students' evaluations of university teaching: Di- 
mensionality, reliability, validity, potential biases, and utility. Journal 
of Educational Psychology, 76, 707-754. 
Marsh, H. W. (1987). Students' evaluations of university teaching: Re- 
search findings, methodological issues, and directions for future re- 
November 1997 • American Psychologist 1195 

search. International Journal of Educational Research, //(Whole 
Issue No. 3). 
Marsh, H. W. (1991). A multidimensional perspective on students' eval- 
uations of teaching effectiveness: A reply to Abrami and d'Apollonia 
(1991). Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 416-421. 
Marsh, H. W. (1994a). Comments to: "Review of the Dimensionality 
of Student Ratings of Instruction: I. Introductory Remarks. II. Aggre- 
gation of Factor Studies. III. A Meta-Analysis of the Factor Studies." 
Instructional Evaluation and Faculty Development, 14, 13-19. 
Marsh, H. W. (1994b). Weighting for the right criteria to validate student 
evaluations of teaching in the IDEA system. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 86, 631-648. 
Marsh, H. W. (1995). Still weighting for the right criteria to validate 
student evaluations of teaching in the IDEA system. Journal of Edu- 
cational Psychology, 87, 666-679. 
Marsh, H. W., & Bailey, M. (1993). Multidimensionality of students' 
evaluations of teaching effectiveness: A profile analysis. Journal of 
Higher Education, 64, 1 - 18. 
Marsh, H. W., & Dunkin, M. (1992). Students' evaluations of university 
teaching: A multidimensional perspective. In J.C. Smart (Ed.), 
Higher education: Handbook on theory and research (Vol. 8, pp. 
143-234). New York: Agathon Press. 
Marsh, H. W., & Hocevar, D. (1991a). The multidimensionality of stu- 
dents' evaluations of teaching effectiveness: The generality of factor 
structures across academic discipline, instructor level, and course 
level. Teaching and Teacher Education, 7, 9-18. 
Marsh, H. W., & Hocevar, D. (1991b). Students' evaluations of teaching 
effectiveness: The stability of mean ratings of the same teachers over 
a 13-year period. Teaching and Teacher Education, 7, 303-314. 
Marsh, H. W., & Roche, L. A. (1993). The use of students' evaluations 
and an individually structured intervention to enhance university 
teaching effectiveness. American Educational Research Journal, 30, 
217-251. 
Marsh, H. W., & Roche, L. A. (1994). The use of students' evaluations 
of university teaching to improve teaching effectiveness. Canberra, 
Australian Capital Territory, Australia: Department of Employment, 
Education and Training. 
Marsh, H. W., & Ware, J. E. (1982). Effects of expressiveness, content 
coverage, and incentive on multidimensional student rating scales: 
New interpretations of the Dr. Fox effect. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 74, 126-134. 
McKeachie, W. J. (1979). Student ratings of faculty: A reprise. Aca- 
deme, 65, 384-397. 
McKeachie, W. J. (I 997). Student ratings: The validity of use. American 
Psychologist, 52, 1218-1225. 
Murray, H. G. (1980). Evaluating university teaching: A review of re- 
search. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Ontario Confederation of Univer- 
sity Faculty Associations. 
Murray, H. G. (1983). Low-inference classroom teaching behaviors and 
student ratings of college teaching effectiveness. Journal of Educa- 
tional Psychology, 75, 138-149. 
Overall, J. U., & Marsh, H. W. (1979). Midterm feedback from students: 
Its relationship to instructional improvement and students' cognitive 
and affective outcomes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 71, 856- 
865. 
Overall, J. U., & Marsh, H. W. (1980). Students' evaluations of instruc- 
tion: A longitudinal study of their stability. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 72, 321-325. 
Powell, R. W. (1977). Grades, learning, and student evaluation of in- 
struction. Research in Higher Education, 7, 193-205. 
Vasta, R., & Sarmiento, R. E (1979). Liberal grading improves evalua- 
tions but not performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 71, 
207-211. 
Watkins, D. (1994). Student evaluations of teaching effectiveness: A 
cross-cultural perspective. Research in Higher Education, 35, 251- 
266. 
Wilson, R.C. (1986). Improving faculty teaching: Effective use of 
student evaluations and consultants. Journal of Higher Education, 
57, 196-211. 
Worthington, A.G., & Wong, P. T. P. (1979). Effects of earned and 
assigned grades on student evaluations of an instructor. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 71, 764-775. 
Postscript 
Greenwald's (1997a) meta-analysis (based on five grade- 
manipulation studies that we critiqued) raises unresolved 
concerns for the authors of the other articles in this Current 
Issues section about technical details, studies included and 
not included, quality and number of studies, and effect-size 
calculations. On the basis of these concerns, our critical eval- 
uation of these studies described earlier, and our reanalysis 
of Greenwald's data (graciously provided to us by 
Greenwald), we disagree with his conclusion that effect sizes 
are "moderate to large." 
D'Apollonia and Abrami's (1997, this issue) ongoing 
concerns about factor analysis, multitrait-multimethod anal- 
ysis, and our multidimensional perspective are addressed by 
Marsh (1994a). Their implication that this perspective is 
based only on factor analysis is countered by the diversity 
of multidimensional construct-validation research empha- 
sized in our article. 
Greenwald and Gillmore (1997, this issue) pursued the 
worthy goal of enhancing SET validity by attempting to 
statistically control the undesirable influence of grading le- 
niency. We concur with other authors in this Current Issues 
section that this ambitious goal was not met, and we outline 
our most serious concerns. 
First, we contend that many of Greenwald and Gill- 
more's (1997) arguments against what they refer to as the 
teaching-effectiveness theory (the validity hypothesis) rely 
on their stated assumption that teaching effectiveness is con- 
stant for all students within a class. However, as McKeachie 
(1997, this issue) explains, what works for one student may 
not work for others--an adage well-known to teachers and 
SET researchers. 
Second, we contend that each of Greenwald and Gill- 
more's (1997) data patterns is open to alternative explana- 
tions consistent with teaching-effectiveness interpretations. 
For example, they conclude that higher relative expected 
grades (getting better-than-usual grades) reflects grading le- 
niency, but better grades also reflect better-than-usual mas- 
tery, thus supporting the validity (teaching-effectiveness) hy- 
pothesis. McKeachie (1997) offers other examples, and we 
join d'Apollonia and Abrami (1997) in encouraging readers 
to generate their own plausible reinterpretations of the results 
in relation to teaching-effectiveness theory and additional 
influences not involving grading leniency and to critically 
evaluate the grading-leniency explanations provided by 
Greenwald and Gillmore. Therefore, we disagree with 
Greenwald and Gillmore's conclusion that the grades- 
ratings correlation is an effect of grading leniency on the 
basis of such correlational data. 
Third, we contend that within a given class, students 
get different grades mostly because they differ in back- 
ground, effort, amount learned, and so forth, not because the 
teacher uses different grading standards for different students 
within the same class. Furthermore, because grading leniency 
is a teacher attribute, we contend that analyses should be 
based on class-average responses, as is widely acknowledged 
in the SET literature. Thus, within-class correlations involv- 
1196 November 1997 • American Psychologist 

ing expected grades of individual students seem not to reflect 
grading leniency so that deductions based on Greenwald 
and Gillmore's (1997) within-class correlations seem largely 
irrelevant in relation to teacher grading leniency. 
Fourth, Greenwald and Gillmore's (1997) critical vari- 
able should be grading leniency (not expected grades), and 
they should ask the following question: If one gives higher 
than deserved grades, will one get higher than deserved rat- 
ings? Whereas it would be desirable to measure grading 
leniency separately from expected grades, we accept the dif- 
ficulty of this task (one that should be pursued in further 
research like our exploratory attempts described earlier). 
When expected grades are used to infer grading leniency, 
however, it is important that all reasonable attempts are made 
to control for effects other than grading leniency (e.g., stu- 
dents' learning and preexisting background differences) and 
to fully acknowledge the inherent difficulty in this task in 
interpreting and applying the results, 
Greenwald and Gillmore's (1997) research does reveal 
how much class-average-expected-grade variance can be ex- 
plained by grading leniency, students' learning, presage vari- 
ables, and so forth. They conclude, however, that increasing 
grades by two standard deviations "should produce" a 
change of one standard deviation in SETs and that "Yes, I 
can get higher ratings by giving higher grades" (p. 1214). We 
assert that these conclusions (and their statistical adjustment) 
inappropriately imply causation from correlation. Their path 
models should include measures of grading leniency "uncon- 
taminated" by students' learning (or separate measures of 
the two constructs) and preexisting background variables 
(e.g., prior subject interest, course level) that may affect 
expected grades and SETs. Even then, causal inferences 
would be highly speculative. Moreover, multisection validity 
studies show that SETs are related to students' learning when 
grading leniency is controlled. These correlations of .30 to 
.40 (up to .57 for SET Organization ratings) are larger than 
typical correlations between SETS and expected grades (.20 
to .30), suggesting that any unique variance attributed to 
grading leniency would be negligible. For these reasons, we 
conclude that correcting for expected grades (instead of the 
intended target--grading leniency) actually eliminates valid 
effects of good teaching reflected in superior learning and 
higher grades, throwing the validity baby out with the bias 
bathwater. 
We agree with McKeachie (1997) that SETs are multidi- 
mensional; broader construct-validity perspectives are 
needed; SET application for improving teaching effective- 
ness and personnel decisions needs improvement; and class- 
size effects are valid, not biased. However, we caution that 
the Instructional Development and Effectiveness Assessment 
students' progress ratings lack discriminant validity (Marsh, 
1994b, 1995) and have not been validated in relation to 
traditional SET criteria (e.g., students' learning). In relation 
to global ratings and norms, we encourage creative strategies 
for how teachers and administrators can best use all available 
SET information--perhaps with consultation--rather than 
denying them access to information, fearing they will mis- 
use it.. 
Greenwald (1997b, this issue), in his postscript, now 
acknowledges that his aim was to "upset the dominant 
view" of recognized SET scholars. His expressed puzzle- 
ment with acceptance of the dominant view, we suggest, 
stems from overreliance on a global view of SETS and crite- 
rion-related-validity perspectives. Effective teaching re- 
flected by SETs is only one of many potential influences on 
students' achievement, and students' achievement is only one 
of many SET criteria. Hence, the correlation of .32 between 
global ratings and achievement and correlations of up to .57 
for Organization ratings are reasonable. Also, demonstrating 
the importance of our multidimensional perspective, we 
showed that enthusiasm and class size do have valid effects. 
Furthermore, it is important to distinguish unfairness from 
bias (class size is a valid influence, not a bias, but may or 
may not be fair). However, Greenwald and Gillmore (1997) 
have provoked new interest in a field where leading authori- 
ties may have become complacent, and for this we thank 
them. 
November 1997 • American Psychologist 1197 
