Review of Literature:
Bassil Obeidi – CP 493
Introduction:
Broad Context:
Sentiment analysis on student reviews of professors specifically from open platforms
such as RateMyProfessor.com represents a novel area for development of machine learning and
statistical techniques to gain insights on both general trends or features of students’ subjective
experience of professors, as well as feedback for professors aiming to improve experience of
their courses. However, the core challenge lies in the methodological difficulty in reducing the
contamination of emotionally biased reviews from legitimate assessments of teaching
effectiveness. This challenge is critical as without accounting for the impact of contamination,
institutions may risk over or underestimating teaching evaluations. Thus, the field urgently
requires a methodological approach for adjusting rates based on estimated emotional bias, over
simple prediction, analysis or description.
Purpose:
The purpose of this literature review is to systematically evaluate the current
approaches, techniques, and goals of existing research in this area. The scope of this review will
cover research papers across three methodological areas, descriptive/exploratory analysis,
predictive/classification modeling and bias evaluation studies. The objective of this review will
be to ascertain what has been done, why has it been done and how has it been done, in order
to demonstrate the critical methodological gap in the literature: the lack of a causal and
interpretable approaches for quantifying and correcting emotional bias in student reviews. The
research frontier demonstrated by this review will cement the necessity of a corrective
statistical and machine learning framework.
Significance:
Obtaining feedback from students regarding their experiences with different professors
represents a high-stakes process fundamental for both faculty improvement, as well as broader
administrative decisions (e.g. tenure and promotion). Additionally, due to the innate
emotionality present in student reviews (students pay for courses, need to pass courses to
progress in their degree and achieve high marks to receive scholarships). This emotional
investment frequently translates into emotionally polarized responses that compromise the
validity of the review and numerical rating given. To this effect, interpreting reviews without
separating emotional bias from objective feedback is severely misleading and unfair to
professors. The significance of this review is therefore to argue for a maturation and
advancement in goals and techniques: moving from simple analytical and descriptive methods
to a more advanced method prioritizing associative interpretability. This advancement will
represent methodological step towards a systematic approach for correction of emotional bias.
Organizational Roadmap:
This review will proceed thematically, first covering the historical context of SET and its
contamination, then covering classical and modern computational approaches. Finally, the
positioning and methodology of this research will be discussed.
Main Body:
1 Historical Context
 1.1 The Issue of Validity in Student Evaluations of Teaching:
From its initial implementation at Purdue University in the 1920s, to its widespread
adoption in the 1960s, systems for Student Evaluations of Teaching Effectiveness (SETE or SET)
have represented a longstanding source of valuable information for academic institutions. In
theory, the idea is sound: obtain student evaluations of their experiences with different courses
and professors, analyze and find consistently underperforming features, and work with
professors and faculty to improve based on the feedback. However, the validity of these
evaluations has increasingly been called into question due to the contamination from situational
variables. Factors such as the gender and popularity of the professor, grade received and which
department the course was taken in and many more, all represent confounding variables, that
greatly weaken the validity and usefulness of the feedback. As summarized by Dowell and Neal
(1983), cited in Emery et al (2003), the systemic existence of these situational variables so
thoroughly contaminate the validity of self-reported student learning and teacher effectiveness
indices that they can only be considered a measure of student satisfaction, rather than
legitimate actionable feedback.
 Given this issue of validity has been known for decades, significant work and research
has gone into attempts to create a strong and generalizable estimate of SET validity. Yet, in
Spooren et al (2013), a meta-study on one hundred and sixty pieces of research, a high
percentage of measuring instruments used for SET are designed without any informed theory of
effective teaching, therefore lacking evidence of content validity and might fail to measure what
they claim to measure. Furthermore, Spooren et al (2013), highlighted previous research, noting
that Paswan and Young (2002) argue that relationships between factors in a SET instrument
should be studied, and Marks (2000) stated reported that some constructs have a large effect
on others. The inconsistent nature of classical SET implementations combined with the inability
to account for confounding and emotional contamination creates an unreconcilable lack of
validity within classical SET approaches. Moreover, as these classical SET approaches have been
labeled as fundamentally flawed, any modern approaches that attempt to derive insights using
machine learning (ML) or statistical techniques, without accounting for contamination of
variables, will result in findings that are themselves fundamentally flawed. Cruse (1987)
reiterates this: The use of student evaluation of teaching for administrative purposes assumes a
direct and demonstrable connection between the evaluation and teaching effectiveness, a
connection that is, in fact, speculative and tenuous. A speculative connection in fact worsened
by the existence of emotional and non-emotional biases. Situational factors are oŌen associated
with the addition of emotionally polarized content into student feedback, that researchers have
begun to increasingly quantify.
2 SET Contamination
2.1 The Mechanisms of Contamination
Situational factors have been shown by rigorous research to strongly correlate with bias
in student reviews of professors. Basow (1995) found that professor gender caused bias in
reviews leading to male professors receiving significantly higher ratings than female, on fairness,
appropriate speech, thought stimulation, knowledge and overall rating. Additionally, it was
found that female student gave significantly higher ratings overall than male students. While
Basow (1995) did note that the statistically significant findings might not be practically relevant
in the aggregate, … it can be argued the results of gender influence may be more than negligible
if all the small influences occur simultaneously. Another situational factor that has a
contaminating effect on rating validity is student absenteeism, a factor that introduces selection
bias into SET evaluations. In Wolbring and Treischl’s (2016) paper on the effect of student
absenteeism on SET evaluations, it was observed that approximately one third of students were
not present for SET evaluations and ultimately concluded that SET was ill suited for cross course
comparison and professor rankings due to the selection bias introduced by absenteeism.
Another two situational factors, perceived course easiness and instructor attractiveness
significantly affected the ratings of professor quality on RateMyProfessor.com, an online
anonymous professor rating site. Instructors perceived as attractive and instructors offering easy
courses tended to be more highly (Felton et al 2004). Countless research has demonstrated that
a wide variety of situational factors introduce bias error that must be accounted for in order to
validly assess and act on SET results.
2.2 Emotional-linguistic Expression of Bias
Classical validity studies have focused on the numerical impact of situational factors as
which can manifest as non-emotional polarization in ratings and cognitive biases in text.
However, recent computational approaches leveraging sentiment analysis have analyzed
linguistic patterns to reveal emotional bias in textual reviews that occur as a result of situational
factors. Analyzing nearly eight million Rate My Professor (RMP) reviews, Fernandez and Yetter
(2025) empirically demonstrated the same situational factors identified in classical validity
critiques directly translate to quantitative measurable amounts of linguistic bias. Specifically,
their study found that sentimental scores are on average 4.3%–5.6% lower for female
instructors, 6% lower for instructors of color relative to White male instructors and persistent
gaps for both sentimental and SET scores between Black and White instructors, particularly
female Black instructors. Overall concluding, that the use of SET results in annual evaluations,
tenure and promotional decisions can harm underrepresented instructors. These results show
that the biases found by Basow (1995) and Wolbring & Treischl’s (2016), manifests in textual
reviews as polarized emotional signals, establishing a quantifiable target for computational
correction and adjustment.
3 Computational Analysis of Student Reviews: Limits of existing approaches
3.1 Early Sentiment Analysis and Descriptive Models
Sentiment Analysis is a computational technique designed to quantify emotional signals
in text, and disentangle the signals into their respective emotions. Earliest and most simple
techniques employ a lexicon-based approach where words most commonly associated with
positive and negative emotions or feelings are tallied in a text, in order to quantify average
positive or negative sentiment. Concretely, for each word in the text, if the word is a match with
the positive lexicon, a score of +1 is added to the sentiment score, and if negative a -1 score is
added. A positive sentiment score of the text is interpreted as an emotionally positive review, a
negative score an emotionally negative, and a score of zero as a mixed review (Rajput et al
2016). However, this approach, while a successful early baseline leading to more sophisticated
approaches, has numerous shortcomings. This approach fails to represent sentiments across an
intensity spectrum, as well as struggles greatly with classifying mixed emotionality reviews due
to the binary classification. Additionally, this approach struggles with the complexity of human
language through its use of slang, punctuation and emojis.
The next computational breakthrough was use of VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and
sEntiment Reasoner) sentiment analysis. VADER is lexicon and rule-based tool that employs
linguistic heuristics in order to more accurately rate sentiment compared to lexicon solely.
Additionally, VADER rates sentiments across a continuous spectrum from -1 (most negative) to
+1 (most positive). A recent approach by Mihai (2024) leveraged VADER to determine the
strength and direction of sentiments within student evaluations of different courses, however
the ultimately noted that VADER struggled with mislabeling comments with emotional
subtleties as neutral sentiment, low sensitivity to context and concluded that additional actions
were required for more accurate results.
By treating sentiment as an outcome rather than a variable with measurable amounts of
bias, these approaches cannot act as a corrective framework. Instead, these methods act as a
way to describe data, cluster findings, predict outcomes. They do not allow for the separation of
emotion caused by situational factors from those caused by teaching and course quality.
Further, sentiment aggregation results in different emotional signals being averaged into one
scalar value. Such methods cannot be used to determine which emotional components result in
distorted or bias numerical or textual ratings.
3.2 Deep Learning Approaches
Transformers based models have represented the next technological leap NLP. These
models train on massive unlabeled datasets in order to learn deep contextual relationships
between words, without manual human input. A commonly used example of one such model
used in research is BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers). Rybinski &
Kopciuszewska (2020) modified and finetuned BERT to predict a numerical rating or topic from a
student review. They found that while the predictions were generally accurate with a validation
accuracy maximum of 84%, NLP models could pick up biases present in the reviews and
exaggerate them further. Additionally, the issue of creating a ML “blackbox” is a real concern
given that relying on them would prevent administrators from understanding or explaining why
and how the neural networks created those evaluations (Rybinski & Kopciuszewska 2020).
Hybrid approaches are another venue of exploration. By combining different types of
deep learning techniques, the goal is to cover the weaknesses of a single model with the
strengths of another. One such example is the method developed by Shuqin and Raga (2024).
Their approach combined the contextual strengths of BERT with the sequence modeling of
BiLSTM (Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory). BiLSTM is a type of Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) that processes data in both a forward and backwards direction, revealing additional
relationships between contexts that can be missed by BERT. This hybrid approach, combined
with thorough data cleaning resulted in an outstanding F1 score of over 0.96 (Shuqin and Raga
2024).
While state-of-the-art Deep Learning approaches represent a significant improvement in
sentiment prediction, they offer no direct solutions to the issue of bias correction. Sentiment
pipelines that employ end to end deep learning models not only combine signal and bias into
one output, but result in an architecture resistant to internal critique or understanding. As with
early lexicon-based approaches the issue of separating pedagogical feedback from emotional
distortion is unsolved. Importantly, using these more accurate models as a basis for high-stakes
institutional decisions can actually worsen the harm on faculty given the models factoring bias
into their predictions. Finally, analyzing sentiment per review aggregates multiple pedagogical
aspects, in which bias contaminates each aspect to different extents. Therefore, bias reduction
or correction would necessarily require aspect-level representation.
3.3 Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis
Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) is an NLP technique that aims to separate text
into the aspects or attributes in which sentiment is being directed to. For example, in the
sentence “The lectures were clear and engaging, but the workload was never-ending.”, the
sentence would be separated into two aspects: lectures and workload. Then sentiment analysis
is performed on the surrounding context directed to each aspect, resulting in two different
sentiment output labels. Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis allows for a more nuanced and finegrained representation of the text. Compared to overall sentiment analysis which would
combine both sentiments directed to the subjects and conclude the overall sentiment is rather
neutral. By conserving aspect-level sentiments, ABSA provides a fine-grained representation of
evaluative text, allowing for analysis across pedagogical dimensions rather than combining
potentially contradictory opinions into a single outcome. ABSA has been successfully applied to
student review data to predict sentiments associated with specific pedagogical features, such as
professor quality, lecture quality, course quality and course curriculum (Nikolic et al 2019, Jazuli
et al 2024). Yet, despite ABSA providing greater representational granularity, it remains strictly a
descriptive approach, and cannot offer any potential for bias adjustment unless paired with
additional techniques.
4 Why Measurement Is Not Enough: The Need for Decontamination
4.1 The Need to Decontaminate Evaluations
As the contaminating bias in student reviews has been shown to be systematic and
quantifiable, there is a strong need to move on from measurement, to intervention and
correction. Given the high-stake nature of SET results in promotion, performance evaluation and
tenure, this leap becomes an administrative and ethical obligation. Valcarcel et al (2021)
meaningfully observed that evaluative commentary from those closest to the source can inform
simple policy changes that improve teaching, and affect student learning and satisfaction.
Moreover, students who voluntarily chose to comment about their teachings cared deeply
about achieving more in school and being treated fairly and with dignity. Simply deeming the
products of SET reviews as hopelessly contaminated and unsalvageable would result in the loss
of an otherwise content rich source for actionable feedback. The need to decontaminate
student evaluations is justified given their innate value, bias and contamination
notwithstanding. Therefore, to ethically and accurately make use of this rich data provided from
SET and other forms of student reviews, a transparent framework based on unbiased estimation
and bias mitigation is uncompromisable and necessary.
4.2 Most Similar works and its limitations
Kim et al 2025 provide a framework most highly positioned to move research in the
direction of addressing the issue of bias correction in SET. In order to determine the relationship
between professor gender and culture versus SET sentiments and numerical ratings, Kim et al
used a hybrid approach of semi-supervised lexicon aspect term extraction combined with
VADER, for ABSA. Then Bayesian Ordinal Regression was employed to determine which factors
(professor gender and culture and per topic sentiments) are the most significant drivers of the
numerical SET score. Researchers found that while ratings were primarily correlated with the
personal characteristics of the professor, a positive gender bias was found towards the majority
gender within a specific faculty, and professors with non-English language backgrounds were
consistently rated lower (Kim et al 2025). However, the study’s methodology has limitations
caused by its textual processing pipeline. Specifically, the use of VADER for sentiment scoring
and a lexicon approach for aspect-term extraction (relying on noun phrases and frequency
counts), restricts sensitivity to context and restricts the resulting sentiment features to the
limitations of older NLP techniques. More critically, their framework does not attempt to
estimate the bias-excluded score and only provides a descriptive analysis of the correlation of
situational factors to aspect sentiments and numerical SET ratings. In conclusion, while Kim et al
provided robust empirical evidence that linguistic and numerical signals are contaminated, they
stopped short of providing a corrective solution.
TBD, add section addressing this paper:
Rybinski & Kopciuszewska 2025 Exploring and modeling cumulative bias and its
asymmetry in student evaluations of teaching at a Polish university
5 Positioning the Present Work
5.1 Objective
The present work will introduce a Sentiment-Aware Bias Correction framework for
student evaluations. The primary goal is to provide a transparent and interpretable method to
reduce the influence and contamination of emotional bias on student evaluations of teaching.
This framework will estimate bias-adjusted ratings by controlling for the contribution of
emotional polarization across pedagogical categories in reviews. Adjusted ratings are not
representative of the true counterfactual rating, simply a methodical attempt to adjust for them
to achieve some sense of correction. Additionally, only emotional bias is being addressed, this
bias may or may not be contributed by situational factors. This framework is not able to target
situational factors, except through their possible manifestation as emotional bias directed
towards pedagogical dimensions.
 This framework primarily leverages aspect-level Sentiment Analysis to capture the
emotionality directed towards distinct pedagogical categories. Then, Ordinal Regression
modeling is used to quantify the contribution of sentiment directed towards different
pedagogical categories contribute to the overall numerical rating. Bias-adjusted ratings are
generated by proportional soŌening; emotional features are scaled towards neutrality by an
amount proportional to their contribution to the overall rating, as quantified by the regression
coefficients. This approach allows for a systematic correction of emotional distortions and
provides an interpretable estimate of counterfactual ratings without claiming to remove
situational bias entirely.
5.2 Key Innovations
This project’s key innovations and areas of novel methodological contributions are firstly
in the combination of ABSA, statistical modeling via Ordinal Regression and bias adjustment by
proportional soŌening. Secondly, the bias adjustment itself, is an unexplored area in
computational SET analysis. Existing approaches whether lexicon, VADER, Deep Learning or
ABSA mainly measure or predict sentiment. A smaller subset of these approaches go as far to
measure bias, however the final step of adjusting or correcting for these biases has been largely
unaddressed. This project represents early efforts in the corrective direction, for computational
SET analysis.
5.3 Methodology
The methodology of this framework can be summarized by four stages. First, textual
reviews are separated into distinct pedagogical categories in order to isolate sentiments
directed towards specific evaluative topics. These separated aspects are fed into a Deep
Learning Sentiment Analysis model. Next, overall ratings per review are modeled as a function
of their associated aspect sentiment features using Ordinal Regression. This step allows for
clarification on how sentiments directed to each pedagogical topic contribute to the numerical
rating, across the entire dataset. Then, using the coefficients obtained in the previous step,
individual sentiment features are proportionally adjusted to be less polarized. Finally, adjusted
emotional signals are recombined to produce a bias adjusted rating using the previously
obtained Ordinal Regression coefficients.
5.4 Discussion, Limitations, and Future Work
 To be added.

Sources
1.1
Emery et al 2003, Return to academic standards: A critique of student evaluations of
teaching effectiveness
Dowell and Neal 1983 The Validity and Accuracy of Student Ratings of Instruction: A Reply to
Peter A. Cohen
Spooren et al 2013 On the Validity of Student Evaluation of Teaching: The State of the Art
Paswan and Young 2002 Student Evaluation of Instructor: A Nomological Investigation Using
Structural Equation Modeling
R. B. Marks 2000 Determinants of Student Evaluations of Global Measures of Instructor and
Course Value
D. B. Cruse 1987 Student Evaluations and the University Professor: Caveat Professor
2.1
 S. A. Basow 1995 Student evaluations of college professors: When gender matters.
 Wolbring and Treischl 2016 Selection Bias in Students' Evaluation of Teaching: Causes of
Student Absenteeism and Its Consequences for Course Ratings and Rankings
 Felton et al 2007 Attractiveness, easiness and other issues: student evaluations of professors
on Ratemyprofessors.com
2.2
 Fernandez and Yetter 2025 Sentiment Analysis of Teaching Evaluations: Evidence From
Nearly 8 Million Rate My Professor Reviews
3.1
 Rajput et al 2016 Lexicon-Based Sentiment Analysis of Teachers’ Evaluation
 G. Mihai 2024 Sentiment Analysis of Students' Feedback Using the VADER Model for
Teaching Process Assessment
3.2
 Rybinski & Kopciuszewska 2020 Will artificial intelligence revolutionise the student
evaluation of teaching? A big data study of 1.6 million student reviews
 Shuqin and Raga 2024 A Deep Learning Model for Student Sentiment Analysis on Course
Reviews
3.3
 Nikolic et al 2020 Aspect-based sentiment analysis of reviews in the domain of higher
education
Jazuli et al 2025 Optimizing Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis Using BERT for Comprehensive
Analysis of Indonesian Student Feedback
4.1
 Valcarcel et al 2021 The Value of Student Feedback in Open Forums: A Natural Language
Analysis of Descriptions of Poorly Rated Teachers
4.2
Kim et al 2025 Relationships between numerical score and free text comments in student
evaluations of teaching: A sentiment topic analysis reveals the influence of gender and
culture
Rybinski & Kopciuszewska 2025 Exploring and modeling cumulative bias and its asymmetry
in student evaluations of teaching at a Polish university
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4


 